Source: https://hackernoon.com/how-lz77-data-compression-works-yk113te0
(Hidden Thanks to Dhanesh Budhrani for this very good explanation!!)

In this post we are going to explore LZ77, a lossless data-compression algorithm 
created by Lempel and Ziv in 1977. This algorithm is widely spread in our current 
systems since, for instance, ZIP and GZIP are based on LZ77.

Compression

LZ77 iterates sequentially through the input string and stores any new match into a 
search buffer. The process of compression can be divided in 3 steps:

    1. Find the longest match of a string that starts at the current position with a 
       pattern available in the search buffer.
    2. Output a triple (o, l, c) where,
        - o: offset, represents the number of positions that we would need to move 
             backwards in order to find the start of the matching string.
        - l: length, represents the length of the match.
        - c: character, represents the character that is found after the match.
    Move the cursor l+1 positions to the right.

Let’s get a deeper insight with an example:

a b a b c b a b a b a a

Initially, our search buffer is empty and we start from the left, where we find an ‘a’. 
Given that there are not any matching patterns in our search buffer, we output 
the triple (0, 0, a), since we are not moving backwards (o = 0) and there is not 
a matching pattern in the search buffer (hence “matching” an empty string: l = 0). 
After this (non-)match, we find the character ‘a’, so c = a. We move l+1 positions 
to the right and find ourselves in the second position. We’ll be indicating the 
position of the cursor using the square brackets [].

a [b] a b c b a b a b a a
LZ77 encoding: (0,0,a)

So far, we do not have any pattern in our search buffer that starts with ‘b’. 
Therefore, the encoding process is similar to the previous step: (0,0,b). 
At this point, things start to get interesting:

a b [a] b c b a b a b a a
LZ77 encoding: (0,0,a), (0,0,b)

We’ve previously found an ‘a’ and even ‘ab’, but not ‘abc’ so we need to move 2 
positions to the left (o = 2) and read 2 characters (l = 2). The next character 
that we can find is a ‘c’, therefore the output triple would be (2,2,c). We move 
our cursor l+1 positions to the right and find ourselves in the character ‘b’.

a b a b c [b] a b a b a a
LZ77 encoding: (0,0,a), (0,0,b), (2,2,c)


We’ve already found a ‘b’, even ‘ba’ and even ‘bab’ but not ‘baba’, so we’ll be 
moving 4 positions to the left (o = 4) and read 3 characters (l = 3). The next 
character that we can find is an ‘a’, and hence the output triple would be (4,3,a). 
We move our cursor l+1 positions to the right and find ourselves in the character ‘b’.

a b a b c b a b a [b] a a
LZ77 encoding: (0,0,a), (0,0,b), (2,2,c),  (4,3,a)

We’re almost done! We’ve already seen a ‘b’ and a ba’, but not a ‘baa’. We need 
to move 2 positions to the left (o = 2) and read 2 characters (l = 2). After this 
match, we find an ‘a’, so the last output triple would be (2,2,a).

a b a b c b a b a b a a
LZ77 encoding: (0,0,a), (0,0,b), (2,2,c), (4,3,a), (2,2,a)

You may have noticed that the time complexity in the compression phase does not 
seem to be too good considering that, in the worst case, we need to go back to 
the beginning of the input string to find a matching pattern (if any). This means 
that, in a 0-index position p, we need to move p positions to the left in the worst 
case.

Thinking of an edge case in which every character of the string is different 
(and hence we do not take advantage of data compression), we would need to process 0 
characters for the first position + 1 for the second + 2 for the third… + n-1 for the 
last position = n(n-1) / 2 = O(n2) time complexity.

This is one of the reasons why it is common to predefine a limit on the size of the 
search buffer, allowing us to reuse the content of up to, for instance, 6 positions 
to the left of the cursor. The following example may help you illustrate this concept, 
where the parentheses indicate the content inside the search buffer.

a b a b c (b a b a b a) [c] b a a a

In this case, we would not find the ‘c’ in the search buffer and, hence, the output 
triple would be (0,0,c) instead of (7,3,a). However, we would not have to potentially 
pay the price in every processed character to find a match, in the worst case, at the 
beginning of the string.

All in all, selecting the size of the search buffer becomes a tradeoff between the 
compression time and the required memory: a small search buffer will generally allow 
us to complete the compression phase faster, but the resulting encoding will require 
more memory; on the opposite side, a large search buffer will generally take longer 
to compress our data, but it will be more effective in terms of memory usage.

It is also common to limit the size of the lookahead buffer, which is the substring 
that starts at the cursor. Let’s illustrate this concept with an example, where the 
lookahead buffer is represented between two * symbols.

a b a b c (b a b a c a) *[b] a b a* c a a

In this case, we have a search buffer of size 6 and a lookahead buffer of size 4. 
Given that the content of our lookahead buffer is ‘baba’ and it is contained in the 
search buffer, the LZ77 encoding at this position would be (6,4,c). Note that, in 
this example, if our lookahead buffer was bigger, the output triple in this position 
would be different.

For instance, if our lookahead buffer also had a size of 6 it would contain the string 
‘babaca’, which is fully contained in the search buffer and, hence, the output triple 
would be (6,6,a).

It is worth mentioning that this algorithm is also known as the “sliding windows” algorithm, 
given that both the search buffer and the lookahead buffer get updated as the cursor “slides” 
through the input text.

Decompression

Let’s see how LZ77 uses its encoded form to reproduce the original string. LZ77 is categorized 
as a lossless data-compression algorithm, which means that we should be able to fully recover 
the original string.

It is also worth mentioning that, in the case of LZ77, we cannot start decompressing from a 
random LZ77 triple: instead, we need to start decompressing from the initial triple. The 
reason is, simply, that the encoded triples are based on the search buffer.

In order to illustrate the decompression process, let’s attempt to decompress the obtained 
encoding in the previous section, aiming to obtain the original string. Therefore, our 
encoding in this example would be the following:

(0,0,a), (0,0,b), (2,2,c), (4,3,a), (2,2,a)

Starting with (0,0,a), we need to move o = 0 positions to the left and read l = 0 characters 
(that is just an empty string). After that, write c = ‘a’. Hence, the decompressed value of 
this triple is ‘a’. At this point, our decompression string looks like this:

Current string: a
Remaining LZ77 encoding: (0,0,b), (2,2,c), (4,3,a), (2,2,a)

The next triple that we find is (0,0,b) which means the following: move o = 0 positions to 
the left and read l = 0 characters (empty string). After that, write c = ‘b’. Hence, the 
decompressed value of this triple is ‘b’. Our decompression string now looks like this:

Current string: a b
Remaining LZ77 encoding: (2,2,c), (4,3,a), (2,2,a)

The next triple that we find is (2,2,c), which is a bit more interesting. Now it means the 
following: move o = 2 positions to the left and read l = 2 characters (‘ab’). After that, 
write c = ‘c’. Hence, the decompressed value of this triple is ‘abc’. Our decompression 
string now looks like this:

Current string: a b a b c
Remaining LZ77 encoding: (4,3,a), (2,2,a)

The next triple that we find is (4,3,a), which means the following: move o = 4 positions 
to the left and read l = 3 characters (‘bab’). After that, write c = ‘a’. Hence, the 
decompressed value of this triple is ‘baba’. Our decompression string now looks like this:

Current string: a b a b c b a b a
Remaining LZ77 encoding: (2,2,a)

The last triple that we find is (2,2,a), which means the following: move o = 2 positions 
to the left and read l = 2 characters (‘ba’). After that, write c = ‘a’. Hence, the decompressed 
value of this triple is ‘baa’. Our decompression string now looks like this:

Fully decompressed string: a b a b c b a b a b a a

If you check the original to-be-compressed string in the previous section, you will see 
that they are the same!

Anhang: https://de.wikibooks.org/wiki/Datenkompression:_Verlustfreie_Verfahren:_W%C3%B6rterbuchbasierte_Verfahren:_LZ77
Codierung des Ausgabestroms

Codierung eines Treffers/Nicht-Treffers 
Länge 	Offset 	                    Folgezeichen
4 3	2 1 12 11 10 9  8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Byte 1 (8 Bit) 	   | Byte 2 (8 Bit)|Byte 3 (8 Bit)

Für die Codierung der Trefferlänge wurde ein 4 Bit langer Wert reserviert. Damit sind alle
Längenangaben zwischen 0 und 15 exakt codierbar. Längere Treffer wurden durch Aneinanderreihung 
mehrerer Treffer erreicht. Wie Sie sehen, werden Treffer und Nicht-Treffer gleichartig codiert. 
Sie sind nach der Codierung immer 24 Bits lang. Bei dieser Darstellung jedoch ergibt sich ein 
riesiges Sparpotential, welches in vielen später entwickelten Varianten ausgenutzt wurde. 
Für die Offsets wurden 12 Bits zur Verfügung gestellt, womit alle Werte zwischen 0 und 4095 
darstellbar sind. Die beiden Werte für Länge und Offset können in einem Block aus 16 Bits 
zusammengefasst werden, das entspricht 2 Bytes. Das Folgezeichen wurde stets separat dazu 
ausgegeben und bildete so das dritte Byte. Pro Treffer oder Nicht-Treffer werden exakt 3 
Bytes Daten ausgeben. Da der Offset 12 Bit lang ist, kann maximal ein 4 Kilobyte (minus ein Byte) 
langer Puffer adressiert werden. 
